## Date: 2026-05-05

### What I tried
- Instead of doing `| sort | uniq`, it's better to do `sort -u`
- Instead of `wc -l "$FILE" | awk '{print $1}'` to strip the filename, we can do `wc -l < "$FILE"`. Thsi is because `$1` could be empty leading to cryptic error
- We can do `cat -20 /etc/snort/snort.conf` nstead of `cat -n 20 /etc/snort/snort.conf`. They're the same.
- We can use the `sed` command to find and replace. For instance, if we wanna replace all the mysql with MYSQL in a file and copy it to a new file then we use the command `cat s/mysql/MYSQL/g /etc/snort/snort.conf > snort.conf`. The `s` means to search for mysql while the `g` means global. If we wanna change only the first occurence then we leave out the g but say we wanna replace the second occurence, then we can change the `g` to `2`
- Cat is good for displaying small file however with larger file, it's cumbersome. With `more`, we use to display content and paging down using the `<enter>` key while we are being shown the percentage covered. However, like the Linux aficionado quip, “Less is more.” Less does everything that `more` does with the additional functionality of filtering. For example, at the bottom, we can type `/output` to directly search for occurrence of output and using `n` to switch to the next occurrences and `q` to exit
- I used the command `read` to get input from the user.
```bash
#!/bin/bash

echo "What is your name?"

read name

echo "What chapter are you on in this book?"

read chapter

echo "Welcome $name to $chapter of this book"
```

### What broke
-

### What I learned
- If a file is very big and we need to see the line numbers of the file contents then we use `nl/etc/snort/snort.conf`
- Grep is basically used for filtering combined with the pipe (|) sign
- Ruby, Python and Perl are the best scripting tools.
- A shell is an interface between the user and the operating system that enables you to manipulate files and run commands, utilities, programs, and much more. The advantage of a shell is that you perform these tasks immediately from the computer and not through an abstraction, like a GUI, which allows you to customize your task to your needs.
- A number of different shells are available for Linux, including the Korn shell, the Z shell, the C shell, and the Bourne-again shell, more widely known as bash.
- The shebang is no the whole `#!/bin/bash` but just the `#!`
- The difference between `chmod +x` and `chmod 755` is that `chmod +x` does not change any other thing apart for adding `x` where it is not present. For instance, if the permission is `-rw-r--r--` then after the `chmod +x`, it becomes `-rwxr-xr-x`. Hence it is basically a quick way to make a file executable without worrying about other bits.
- `./` tells the system that we wanna execute the script in the file. It also tells the sytem to focus on the file in the current directory in case there are duplicates or files with the same name in other directories.
- A variable is an area of storage that can hold something in memory
- The command `read` is used to get input from the user and stores the input in a variable.

### Commands/code worth remembering
```code

```

### Questions for later
-