## Date: 2026-04-27

### What I tried
- I wrote my first real script which checks if the user is root and using apt to update and upgrade. Hoowever if the user is not root, it uses sudo.
```bash
#!/bin/bash

USERNAME=$(whoami)

if ["$USERNAME" == "root"]; then
	echo "running as root, ready to update..."
	apt update && apt upgrade -y
else
	echo "not root, running sudo..."
	sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
fi
```
- I created another script to check if the file test.txt exists and prints it out. If it doesn't exist then it creates the file
- `[ -f 'test.txt' ]` returns true if the regular file exists.
```bash
#!/bin/bash
# This script is to checks and prints if the test.txt file exist and creates it
FILENAME=$1
#checks if user provided an argument
if [ -z "$FILENAME"]; then
	echo "Error: No filename provided" 
	echo "Usage: ./file-check.sh filename.txt" 
	exit 1
fi

if [ -f "$FILENAME" ]; then
        echo "File found: $FILENAME"
        cat "$FILENAME"
else
        echo "File not found: $FILENAME"
        echo "Creating $FILENAME..."
        echo "File created on $(date)" > "$FILENAME"
fi
```
- `-z` checks if a string is empty i.e when no argument is provided
- `exit 1` stops the script immediately without running any other command. It signifies failure while exit 0 signifies success
- Checking if something exist and acting accordingly is the backbone of every security automation script 
- To view the users, groups and passwords on the system, we use the command `cat /etc/passwd`,  `cat /etc/group` and `cat /etc/shadow` respectively
- `/etc/shadow` contains password hashes which require root privilege to run. It is the file attackers try to steal and crack offline.
- `sudo -l` tells you what `sudo` permissions you have to run as a user
```

```

### What broke
- When i ran `[-f "test.txt"]`, It worked but i got an error before the echo. To remove it, I checked to see that some padding is maintained between the square bracket and the a single quote is used instead of a double quote. However, we use double quote on things like "$1"
- I tried making variables in bash and it didn't work as i kept getting line no - command not found. However, I was able to fix it after I realized that when writing a variable, there should be no space or padding to the left and right of the equal to sign. For instance, `FILE_NAME='fake-auth.log'`
- 

### What I learned
- Conditionals give the script ability to make decisions. The `if` statement is the most important conditional. The basic syntax is as follows:
```bash
if [condtion]; then
	# do this if condition is true
else
	# do this if condition is false
fi
```
- `fi` is `if` backwards and it closes the if block.
- A dashed filename refers to a file that starts with hyphen or dash. This is problematic as command-line tools interpret a leading dash as the start of a command option such as -r, -f rather than a file name. To solve this, we have to put in the path followed byt the dash filename. e.g `cat /home/bandit1/-`
- For a file whose name has spaces, we can wrap the name in single or double quotes such as `cat /home/bandit2/'--spaces in this filename--'`. We can also use a backslash escaping `cat /home/bandit2/--spaces\ in\ this\ filename--`. Pressing tab after writing the spaced file name can also add the necessary quotes or escape characters
- `reset` command clears the terminal
- To search for a file based on size, the command is `find path -type f -sizeU` where `U` can be any unit. Units include c (bytes), k (kilobytes), M (Megabytes), G (Gigabytes) and b (512-byte blocks) which is default if there is no suffix
- To find empty files, we just use the `-empty` instead of putting in any `-size`
- Too find a file by its user, we use `-user USERNAME`, by its group, use `-group GROUPNAME` while if you want by one user or the other, you can use `-group userA -o -user userb` where `-o` means or
- The most powerful account in Linux is called root which can read any file, change any permission, run any command, and even destroy the entire system in one command. Running `sudo` temporarily makes you temporarily borrow root power for a single command
- 
### Commands/code worth remembering
```code

```

### Questions for later
-