## Date: 2026-04-26

### What I tried
- When we do `dd` to delete a whole line or any command that deletes text, that line is stored in a Vim register and can be recalled using `p`
- To replace a character with x, we use the command `rx`. If it's to be changed to p, we use the command `rp`
- We can change until the end of a word using the command `ce` while `cc` does the same for the whole line
- The change operator can be used in the same way as the delete command in that we can change certain certain words using `c3w` , or `c3e` to change from the end of a word or change to the end of the line using `c$`
- To see the line number, we press `ctrl+G`. Also we press `G` to move to the bottom of the file, `gg` to move to the start of the file and if we know the file number we wanna go to then we press `line number + G`
- In normal mode, to search for a phrase, we use the `/+phrase`. Moving forward to search for the phrase again, we simply type `n` while moving backward, we type `N`. Then to search in backward direction, we use `?` instead of `/`. Finally to go back to where you came from, we use `ctrl+o` while to go forward, we use `ctrl+I`
- We type `%` to find a matching ), }, or ] basically matching parenthesis. It is useful in debugging a program with unmatched parenthesis
- To substitute a word with another word say thee for the, then we use the command `:s/thee/the` however this works only for the first occurence of thee. To do it for all occurences on the line then we use `:s/thee/the/g`. Also, to get a prompt of confirmation for every occurence that should be changed, then we use `:s/thee/the/gc`. Also, if we want the change to be in the whole file, then we use `:%s/thee/the/g`.  Finally, if we want the change to be only between a range of line numbers then we use `:#,#s/thee/the/g`. We can add c if we need a confirmation prompt.
- All `:` commands must be finished by pressing ENTER
- To execute an external command like `ls`, we press `:!ls` followed by ENTER
- We can create a file using external commands like `:w TEST` in vim where TEST is the name of the new file and will appeear in the directory when checked with `:!ls`. We can also delete it using `:!rm TEST`
- To highlight a text and save it to another file, first we have to go into visual selection mode using `v`. Then any movement of the cursor selects text. We can then press `:` which would bring up the `:'<,'>`. Then we have to give the new file a name by pressing `w fileName` and ENTER. When highlighted, we can also press `d` to delete the selected text.
- To input a file in in vim, we simply do `:r fileName`. Also to input the output of an external command like `ls`, we do `:r !ls` which reads out the output and puts it below the cursor position.
- To open a new line below the cursor, press `o` which would activate insert mode while `O` would open a new line above the cursor
- To append text to an incomplete word after the cursor, we can use `e` to go to the end of the word and press `a` to append text after the cursor
- Another way to replace is to type `R` to replace more than one character
- To copy and paste, we use `v` to enter visual mode and then copy the highlighted text using `y` (yank) and `p` to paste the text. However, we cauld also copy a word with `yw` or a whole line with `yy` and `p` to paste.
- Typing ":set xxx" sets the option "xxx".  Some options are:
        'ic' 'ignorecase'       ignore upper/lower case when searching
        'is' 'incsearch'        show partial matches for a search phrase
        'hls' 'hlsearch'        highlight all matching phrases
     You can either use the long or the short option name.
     Prepend "no" to switch an option off:   :set noic
- To see all commands starting with a letter say `e` then do `:e` and press `ctrl+d`
- Type `:help` to see the help window on Vim. You can also see the help of a command like cmd using `:help cmd` and use `:q` to close help window
- `ctrl+w` to go to a new window
- I wrote my first bash script#!/bin/bash
```bash
#!/bin/bash
# My fist bash script

echo "Starting system clock..."
echo "Current location:"
pwd

echo "Files in this directory"
ls -la

echo "Current user:"
whoami

echo "Done."

echo "Updating system..."
sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
```
- `-y` remove the need for a confirmation and says yes to everything. It is important because a script has to run unattended and doesn't necessarily need attention else automation breaks
- When inputting variables in the script, there should be no white spaces. To input variables, `USERNAME=$(whoami)`, `DATE=$(date)`. Meanwhile to access the variables in different context, then we do `echo "User: $USERNAME"`
- The `$()` is called `command substitution` in that it runs the command inside the bracket and captures the output as a value which is then stored in a variable. This is useful for re-usability in that we define once and use everywhere hence changing can be easily done instead of hunting throughout the script.


### What broke
-

### What I learned
- A bash script is a file of Linux commands that run automatically in sequence. It is how security professionals automate tasks
- Every bash script start with the `shebang` line which tells the system which interpreter to use. The `shebang` line is `#!/bin/bash`

### Commands/code worth remembering
```code

```

### Questions for later
-