## Date: 2026-05-04

### What I tried
- I ran the command `find /usr -user root -perm -4000 -type f 2>/dev/null` to find SUID files that are root based. Then i confirmed it was SUID set using `ls -l /usr/bin/chsh` and removed the SUID using `chmod 0755 /usr/bin/chsh` and also put it back using `chmod 4755 /usr/bin/chsh`
- I wrote another script that takes a log file to perform some actions
```bash              
#!/bin/bash
# This script takes fake-auth.log as a log file to perform some actions

FILE_NAME=$1
if [ -z "$FILE_NAME" ]; then
        echo "No file given"
        exit 1
fi

if [ -f "$FILE_NAME" ]; then
        TOTAL_LINES=$(wc -l "$FILE_NAME" | awk '{print $1}')
        FAILED_LINES=$(grep -c -i "failed" "$FILE_NAME")
        ACCEPTED_LINES=$(grep -c -v -i "failed" "$FILE_NAME")

        echo "The total number of lines is $TOTAL_LINES"
        echo "The number of failed lines is $FAILED_LINES"
        echo "The number of accepted lines is $ACCEPTED_LINES"
        head -n 5 "$FILE_NAME"
else
        echo "This file does not exist."
fi
```

### What broke
-

### What I learned
- The reason I made the VM is because it wil be a safe slaughterhouse for my experiments
- In `drwxrwxrwt`, the `t` at the end is called the sticky bit which restricts deletion of a file. So if it is in the `/tmp` where everyone should normally be able to write, edit and delete, the attacker won't be able to delete other people file but only their own file. Hence the attacker is happier if the sticky bit is removed. The `t` can be removed with `chmod -t /tmp` but most times, `/tmp` and `/var/tmp` are sticky
- `ls -ld` lists the directory itself but not the contents
- Attackers prefer a directory without sticky bit as it would help them clean up competition but their own file risk being deleted as well. Attacker would need to find a directory where they have write and delete protection to avoid easy cleanup hence, good attackers use hidden name and deep paths, not just sticky bits.
- Attackers can write malicious scripts to `/tmp` then execute them if a privileged process (e.g. cron job) runs from `/tmp`
- Running rm -rf /tmp/* while sticky bit is set would delete only files I own and not others. Similarly it would also protect my files if the case is reversed
- The command `tail -f /var/log/auth.log` prints events as they happen. The `-f` means follow, it prints new lines as they are added in real time
- We do git add ., git commit -m "" and git push to save to github. Before git push, you can commit many times to the local machine
- `chmod u+x` would give execute permission while `chmod u+s` would give SUID permission
- 
### Commands/code worth remembering
```code

```

### Questions for later
- How do i set a sticky bit?
